---
layout: post
title:  "4E03 - Lecture 4"
date:   2020-09-16 16:30:00 -0400
categories: 4E03
---

Further Distributions
===

- **Exponential** (Continuous)
    - One parameter, "rate" $\lambda$:  
    $f_X(x) = \lambda e^{-\lambda x}$, $x \geq 0$  
    and 0 otherwise.  
    $F_X(x) = 1 - e^{-\lambda x}$. $x \geq 0$  
    and 0 otherwise.
    - $E[X] = \frac{1}{\lambda}$
    - $Var(X) = \frac{1}{\lambda^2}$

Example Q1
- Jobs arriving to a server have CPU time that is exponentially disributed with mean 140ms. The CPU scheduling discipline is "quantum-oriented", so if a job doesn't complete in 100ms, it will be routed back to the tail of the queue of waiting jobs
    1. Find the probability that a job has to wait for a second quantum  
    SOLN:  
    Want to find: probability a second quantum is required.  
    Let X be CPU time required.  
    $X ~ Exp(\frac{1}{140})$  
    $P(X \gt 100) = 1 - P(X \leq 100)$  
    $ = 1 - (1 - e^{\frac{-100}{140}})$  
    **$ = 0.4895$**
    2. Suppose 800 jobs arrive in a particular time interval, how many are expected to finish in the first quantum?  
    SOLN:  
    $P(X \leq 100) = 1 - 0.4895 = 0.5105$  
    This is the chance that any one succeeds in the first quantum, to scale this for 800,  
    $P(X) = (800)(0.5105)

Memoryless Property
- Suppose $X ~ Exp(\lambda)$
- Suppose that we know X > b. What is the probability that X > a + b? (Only making sense if $a \geq 0$)  
$P(X \gt a + b \| X \gt b) = \frac{P((X \gt a + b) \cap (X \gt b))}$  
$= \frac{P(X \gt a + b)}{P(X \gt b)}$  
$= \frac{e^{-\lambda(a + b)}}{e^{-\lambda b}}$
**$= e^{-\lambda a}$**  
Which is exactly the same as P(X > a)
- This is known as the "memoryless" property since the future is independent of the past, given the present. Knowing that time b has elapsed gives no information about the future
    - Fact: The exponential distribution is the only continuous distribution with the memoryless property
- Often used to model phenomena with this property

Example Q2
- What is the probability that a job finishes in the second quantum, given it does not finish in the first quantum?  
SOLN:  
It's the exact same as the first quantum. The memoryless property states that it is like starting all over, since these are independent events

In-Lecture Demo
- Given a data centre with 8 servers, which server should we send any arriving data to? What if we want to turn off servers or one of them fails? What is the *performance* of all this and how can we show it?
    - Performance can be given by:
        - Low latency
        - Response time
        - Failure rate
        - Energy efficiency
        - Server usage
        - Throughput
        - Load balancing
    - What to do if we want to evaluate any of the above performance metrics?
        - One method is the **workload model**, look at the frequency of arrivals, processing time
    - Note for measuring response times, each job has a different response time, how to still show this?
        - Low mean (E[R])
        - Low 95% percentile  
        $P(R \leq T) \geq 0.95$
            - Could be 99%, or any percentage
- Lets look at an example with different schemes for handling requests
    - Scheme 1:  
    $E[R_1] = 1$  
    $Var(R_1) = 2$
    - Scheme 2:  
    $E[R_1] = 1.1$  
    $Var(R_1) = 0$
        - 2 has no randomness, always returns in 1.1, whereas 1 has a large amount of randomness, sometimes returning very low or very high response times
- This can also be seen on some of the slides

**Stochastic Models**
- May want to capture how a system evolves using *dependent* random variables, described by some dynamics. A very simple model that's widely applicable is a **Discrete Time Markov Chain**, which has been used for web page navigation, speech recognition, ML, etc.