---
layout: post
title:  "4E03 - Tutorial 2"
date:   2020-09-21 11:30:00 -0400
categories: 4E03
---

DTMC Examples (Incomplete)
===

1. A DTMC {$X_n, n \geq 0$} has states {1, 2, 3}. The probability transition matrix is given by
AAA (matrix)
- a) Determine P{$X_5 = 3 \| X_3 = 1, X_2 = 2}  
SOLN:  
We know that the state of a system only depends on the last state the system was in, with no care for the history of it, or where it was before, so we can ignore the X2 value. We can use this to calculate...  
$P(X_5 = 3 \| X_3 = 1) = P^2_{1, 3}$  
We can then put the matrix to power 2, and look at entry (1, 3) to get the value:  
AAA (matrix)
- b) Determine P{$X_9 = 3, X_7 = 3 \| X_5 = 3, X_2 = 2}  
Again, we can ignore X2 since that is history we do not care about, since we will state from X5. We can then write the equations:  
$P(X_9 = 3 \| X_7 = 3) * P(X_7 = 3 \| X_5 = 3)$  
$= P^2_{3, 3} * P^2_{3, 3}$  
NOTE: It is to the power of 2 since it is going in 2 time steps (7 to 9, 5 to 7). We can then use the previous matrix to calculate this value:  
AAA (ans)

2. In two urns A and B, there are 3 red balls and 2 green balls. Suppose initially two green balls are in urn A and the three red balls are in urn B. Each turn, a ball is randomly chosen from the urn with three balls and placed in the urn with two balls. This process continues indefinitely.
- a) Choose an appropriate state for this system and find the probability transition matrix  
SOLN:  
Let X_n = the number of red balls in urn with 2 balls  
This would give us three possible states, {0, 1, 2} red balls in the urn. We can now make the following P matrix:  
$$ P = \begin{bmatrix}
0 & 0 & 1 \\
0 & 0.666 & 0.333 \\
0.333 & 0.666 & 0  \\ 
\end{bmatrix}$$ 
- b) AAA (finish) 
We need to find $\pi_2$, and using the equation $\pi P = \pi$, we can then get the equations:  
$\frac{1}{3} \pi_2 = \pi_0$  
$\frac{2}{3} \pi_1 + \frac{2}{3} \pi_2 = \pi_1$  
AAA (finish)

3. A data acquisition system (DAQ) has two temperature sensors, one primary and one backup. With each sample, there is a probability of a fault arising in the primary sensor (0.05). The system immediately switches to the backup se
AAA (finish notes)
- a) Model the system as a DTMC, by choosing appropriate states and determining the probability transition matrix  
SOLN:  
There are four possible states in this problem:  
0 : Primary sensor is being used  
1 : Backup sensor is being used  
2 : Backup sensor is failed  
3 : One sampling time has passed since the backup failed
AAA (matrix)
- b) Calculate the steady-state probability that a sample is not recorded at a sampling time  
SOLN:  
Looking for $\pi_2 + \pi_3$, can use equations:  
$0.95 \pi_0 + \pi_3 = \pi_0$  
$0.05 \pi_0 + 0.9 \pi_1 = \pi_1$  
$0.1 \pi_1 = \pi_2$  
$\pi_2 = \pi_3$  
$\pi_0 + \pi_1 + \pi_2 + \pi_3 = 1$  
Solving these equations, we then get