---
layout: post
title:  "3Y03 - Lecture 17"
date:   2020-10-22 10:30:00 -0400
categories: 3Y03
---

Normal Random Variable, Office Hours
===

Ex: If we have random variables $X_1, ..., X_n$, with mean $\mu$ and variance $\sigma^2$, and the function Y is defined as $Y = X_1 + ... + X_n$, what is the mean and variance of Y?  
- SOLN:  
The mean would be:  
$$E[Y] = E[X_1 + X_2 + ... + X_n]$$  
$$= 0 + 1*E[X_1] + ... + E[X_n]$$  
We get this from the c*E[X] equation, and we also know that each average is $\mu$, so we get:  
$$E[Y] = n*\mu$$  
Furthermore, the variance would be:  
$$V[Y] = V[1*X_1 + ... + 1*X_n]$$  
$$= 1^2 * V(X_1) + ... + 1^2 * V(X_n)$$  
We also know that all variance is $\sigma^2$, so we get:  
$$V[Y] = n*\sigma^2$$

Office Hours (Assignment 3)
- Q7: $f(x, y) = ce^{-6x-10y}, 0 \lt y \lt x$
- 7a) $P(x \lt 2, y \lt 1/5)$  
SOLN:  
First, we should find the value of c. We can do this using the property of:  
$$\int_{-\inf}^{\inf} \int_{-\inf}^{\inf} f_{XY}(x, y) dx dy = 1$$  
This is solved by graphing $x = y$, and calculating the bottom portion to represent $y \lt x$ to get the domain. We use horizontal and vertical lines to find the lower and upper limits of each integral. We can then produce the integral:  
$$\int_0^{\inf} \int_y^{\inf} ce^{-6x-10y} dx dy = 1$$  
NOTE: We use 0 to infinity for y because we already handle the $y \lt x$ in the inner integral. The outer integer should ALWAYS be a number.  
We now need to find the domain for $0 \lt y \lt x$ and $x \lt 2, y \lt 1/5$. We can use the same methodology to find the lower and upper limits for the integrals, giving us:  
$$P(x \lt 2, y \lt 1/5) = \int_?^? \int_?^? ?e^{-6x-10y} dx dy$$
- 7b) Marginal probability distribution of *X*  
SOLN: 
Integrate the *y* out of the equation to get the pdf of *x*.

- Q8: $f_{XY}(x, y) = $\frac{3}{290} x, 0 \lt x \lt 7, y \gt 0, x - 2 \lt y \lt x + 2$  
- 8a) $E[XY] = ?$  
SOLN:  
$$E[XY] = \int_?^? \int_?^? xy f_{XY}(x, y) dx dy$$  
The bounds can be calculated again from the graph. Use $0 \lt x \lt 7$ and $y \gt 0$ as bounds, and draw lines for $x-2 = y$ and $x+2 = y$, getting the bounds by the upper and lower sections of the lines, respectively.  
There are multiple bounds for these values, so we will need to do multiple integrals:  
$$\int_?^2 \int_?^? xy f_{XY} dx dy + \int_2^? \int_?^? xy f_{XY} dx dy$$ +
\int_?^? \int_?^? xy f_{XY} dx dy$$
- 8b) $cov(X, Y) = E[XY] - E[X] E[Y]$  
SOLN:  
We already know E[XY] from a), we can now calculate the others as follows:  
$$E[X] = \int x * f_X$$  
$$E[Y] = \int y * f_Y$$  
Note, we're not given the marginal PDFs, so we will need to calculate those manually. 

- Q9: Load bearing bar with values:  
$$Y = a_1x_1 + a_2x_2$$  
$$E[Y] = a_1 E[X_1] + a_2 E[X_2]$$  
$$V[Y] = a_1^2 V[X_1] + a_2^2 V[X_2]$$  
Standard deviation is given, square them for $V(X_1)$ and $V(X_2)$. To get the total standard deviation, square root the answer.  
Furthermore, for c):  
$$P(Y > 138)$$  
Standardize Y to a normal random variable and then use the table to compute the value