---
layout: post
title:  "4E03 - Tutorial 1"
date:   2020-09-16 11:30:00 -0400
categories: 4E03
---

TA's cycle for tutorials, not one specific

Practice Questions
===

NOTE: Nothing marked, all practice

Q1: A ticket purchasing website is protected by a CAPTCHA-like system. A series of 3 image recognition tasks is given to a user, and the 3 tasks have been designed to be difficult for a robot. The probability of a human passes each task is 0.95, and probability of a robot passing is 0.2. A user is flagged if they fail at least one of these.  
$P(\text{human pass}) = 0.95$  
$P(\text{human fail}) = 0.05 (1 - 0.95)$
$P(\text{robot pass}) = 0.20$
$P(\text{robot fail}) = 0.80$
$P(\text{flagged}) = P(\text{user fails \geq 1/3 tasks})$
- a) What is the probability a user is flagged? Probability a robot is flagged? Assume success/failure of a task is independent from the other tasks  
SOLN:  
$P(\text{human is flagged}) = P(\text{human fails at least one})$  
(This would include anything like PPF, PFP, PFF, etc.). This would need to check how often they pass three times.   
$= 1 - P(\text{human passes all})$  
$= 1 - (0.95)^3$  
**$= 0.143$**  
For the robot,  
$P(\text{robot is flagged}) = P(\text{robot fails at least one})$  
$= 1 - (0.2)^3$  
**$= 0.992$**
- b) Suppose that 1/10 of the users are robots, and suppose a user is flagged. What's the probability that they are a robot?  
SOLN:  
$P(\text{user is robot}) = 1/10 = 0.1$  
$P(\text{user is human}) = 9/10 = 0.9$  
How do we calculate for the question? Conditional probability!  
$P(\text{user is robot} \| \text{user is flagged})$  
We don't know this, but we know the inverse, and can find the original answer using Bayes law:  
$P(\text{robot} \| \text{flagged})$  
$= \frac{P(\text{flagged} \| \text{robot}) * P(\text{robot})}{P(\text{flagged})}$  
$P(\text{robot flagged}) = (0.992)(0.1)$  
$P(\text{human flagged}) = (0.143)(0.9)$  
(Note, the above is just to state that they'll be flagged if they fail and they are a robot/human multiplied together) 
$P(\text{flagged}) = 0.0992 + 0.1287 = 0.2279$  
Going back to the original equation,
$= \frac{(0.992)(0.1)}{0.2279}$
**$= 4353$**


Q2: Consider 3 email messages. An email message is spam with probability 0.3, and an email is spam independent of other email messages  
$P(\text{spam / S}) = 0.3$  
$P(\text{not spam / N}) = 0.7$  
- a) If you are told two of the emails are not spam, what is the probability that all of the email messages are not spam?  
SOLN:  
Let A be the set of emails that are all not spam:  
A = {(N N N)}  
$P(A) = (0.7)^3 = \text{N N N}$  
Let B be the set of emails that have two non-spam messages:  
B = {(N N N), (N N S), (N S N), (S N N)}  
$P(B) = (0.7)^3 + (0.7)^2(0.3)$  
NOTE: Order doesn't matter so we just look for ones with 3 N and ones with 2 N and one S  
$= 0.784$  
Now for the main question:  
$P(A \| B) = \frac{0.7^3}{0.784}$  
**$= 0.4375$**  
- b) Suppose you're told that the first two emails are not spam. What's the chance that all the emails are not spam?  
SOLN:  
This is very similar to the last one, but now it is ordered.  
Let A be the set of emails that are all not spam:  
A = {(N N N)}  
$P(A) = (0.7)^3 = \text{N N N}$  
Let B be the set of emails that have the first two as non-spam messages:  
B = {(N N N), (N N S)}  
$P(B) = (0.7)^3 + (0.7)^2(0.3)$  
$= 0.784$  
Now for the main question:  
$P(A \| B) = \frac{P(A \cap B)}{P(B)}$  
$= \frac{P(A)}{P(B)}$  
$= \frac{0.7^3}{0.784}$  
**$= 0.7$**

Q7: Suppose a chess player has a 90% chance of winning any game in a competition.  
$P(W) = 0.9, P(F) = 0.1$
- a) What is the probability she wins exactly 3 games if she plays a total of 5 games?  
SOLN:  
The wins of one game do not affect the others and these are all independent events, so this is a **binomial distribution**  
$P(X = x) = \binom{N}{x} p^x (1-p)^{N-x}$  
NOTE: Large X is the random variable, small x is what we're looking for  
$P(X = 3) = \binom{5}{3} (0.9)^3 (0.1)^2$  
$= 10 * 0.729 * 0.01$  
**$= 0.0729$**
- c) What is the probability she wins a match in exactly 3 games?  
SOLN:  
Similar to last, but this time she needs to win the first three  
$P(X = x) = \binom{3}{3} (0.9)^3(0.1)^0$  
**$ = 0.729$**   
- d) Suppose a match ends when a player wins 3 games over another player. What is the probability she wins the match?  
SOLN:  
$P(\text{winning a match}) = ?$  
$P(\text{3 games in a row}) = (0.9)^3$  
$P(\text{3 games} + \text{1 loss}) = (0.9)^3(0.1)$  
$P(\text{3 games} + \text{2 loss}) = (0.9)^3(0.1)^2$  
Putting these all together, and multiplying by the different orders the wins/losses can happen in...  
$P(\text{winning a match}) = (0.9)^3 + 3(0.9)^3(0.1) + 6(0.9)^3(0.1)^2$  
**$= 0.9914$**



