---
layout: post
title:  "4HC3 - Lecture 16"
date:   2020-10-20 11:30:00 -0400
categories: 4HC3
---

Usability Test Plan Continued
===

Example Usability Test Plan
- Going over an example for a student book purchasing site
- Look over main tasks and see what you want tackled

Book Website Usability Test Plan
- Scope: The usability test will cover the book website's book searching, shopping cart, and manage payment features
- Purpose: We wish to evaluate the usability of the Book Website with respect to usability goals as well as to identify potential usability issues that should be corrected.  
The shopping cart for the Book Website is unconventional, and we wish to ensure that it is not confusing for users to learn. We're also concerned that the payment collection feature may not be something that users can trust. We wish to investigate these potential issues specifically.
- Format: Testing will take place between November 16th and December 3rd 2020. The usability tests will be asynchronous and unmoderated, but communication with participants will take place over Microsoft Teams.
- Participants: Participants will be made up of 5 students enrolled in Human Computer Interfaces Fall 2020
- Equipment: A web browser will be used by participants to use the application. We will be asking participants to record their screen with screen recording software and to provide us with a think aloud as they perform tasks recorded with their microphone
- Roles: The participants will carry out the instructions provided, and my role will be to analyze and report the data collected
- Sessions: Usability test sessions will be conducted as follows:
    1. Participants will fill out pre-test quiz
    2. Participant will be asked to record their screen and microphone while thinking aloud and performing each of the following task scenarios:
        - a) Task Scenario 1 - Search for the book 1986 and add it to the shopping cart. Search for the book Animal Farm and add it to the shopping cart
        - b) Task Scenario 2 - Complete your purchase of the items above by using the shopping cart and complete purchase, and request a receipt after doing so
        - c) Task Scenario 3 - Collect payment for the books you have sold so far using the bank account #12345 and branch #1234567
    3. Participants will fill out post-test quiz
    4. Participant will send their video file via Microsoft Teams chat and let us know that they have completed the test
    5. Short interview via chat will be conducted with the participant
    - We estimate that the test should take roughly 20-25min maximum for the participant to complete
- Observations and Metrics: After receiving the video from the participant, specific qualitative observations will be made via note-taking as to the participant's performance and experience with the tasks.  
The following metrics will be kept track of specifically:
    - Performance in seconds for each task
    - Number of errors made per task
        - An error will be considered to be made when a user attempts the wrong user action (eg. click the wrong link)
    - Both metrics will be measured via observations made via note taking, a stopwatch will be used in the case of performance time and errors will be kept track of by ticking off boxes
- Instruments/Surveys and Interviews: We will use a pre-test and post-test survey, see the attached surveys in the appendix.  
After the test is complete and we receive the recording form the user, we will ask the following post-test interview questions in a scripted interview:
    - What were your favourite parts of the interface?
    - Did anything about the shopping cart page seem particularly confusing to you?
    - Was there anything the application could have done to increase your trust in the application payment section?
- Appendix: See the attached pre-test and post-test surveys (gone over in lecture)
    