---
layout: post
title:  "4HC3 - Lecture 7"
date:   2020-09-22 11:30:00 -0400
categories: 4HC3
---

UI Design: Guidelines
===

UI Design
- So far
    - Found ways to...
        - Represent our design (sketches, wireframes, etc)
        - Inform and influence our decisions through user/task analysis
        - Create and explore possible different designs and make design decisions through divergent/convergent thinking
    - How to make these design decisions?
- **Design Decisions** are exactly what they sound like, decisions we make during the design of an interface
    - Many possible ways to make a design decision
        - Intuition 
            - How do you know it is a good decision?
        - Experience 
            - How do you know there isn't a better way?
        - Reference 
            - Is what others are doing the best way?
        - Consensus 
            - Is the crowd always right? how to account for group thinking?
    - All valid, but all have issues, as marked below them
        - How would you feel about using a bridge based on intuition? Major surgery based on consensus
- Guidelines, principles, and theories
    - Each operate at different levels of abstraction (guidelines require least interpretation, theories require the most)
    - **Guidelines** provide low-level advice about good practices and cautions against dangers
        - ie. specific do's and don'ts
        - Tend to be specific to certain types of applications, devices, or parts of the UI
            - ie. Web design guidelines, iOS guidelines, etc.
        - Guidelines can look like:
            - Standardize task sequences. Allow users to perform tasks in the same sequence and manner across similar conditions.
            - Ensure links are descriptive. When using links, the  link text should accurately describe it's destination
            - Use unique and descriptive headings. Use headings that are distinct from one another and conceptually related tot he content they describe.
                - Can also be "do not" things, like do not display unsolicited windows or graphics
        - Lots of guideline documents out there, in a range of topics from a range of major developers (ie. Apple, Microsoft, Google)
            - Many of the major developer ones are for their own ecosystem as well
        - Accessibility guidelines also important, sometimes even required for legal reasons
        - Lots of guidelines in slides to view in certain scenarios
        - Guidelines can be criticized though
            - Too specific, how many can you remember?
            - Incomplete, are we covering everything?
            - Hard to apply, what does it mean for a benefit statement to be "compelling"?
            - Sometimes wrong, new data is learned and old guidelines become obsolete
        - Guidelines can be used as part of usability testing though
    - **Principles** are middle-level strategies or rules to analyze and compare design alternatives
    - **Theories** are high-level, widely applicable frameworks to draw on during design and evaluation, as well as to support communication and teaching
        - Can also be predictive, like those for pointing times by individuals, or positing rates for community discussion
