---
layout: post
title:  "4E03 - Lecture 6"
date:   2020-09-21 16:30:00 -0400
categories: 4E03
---

Scholastic Models Cont
===

Calculating Limiting Probabilities
- Is there a better way to find $\pi_i$, as opposed to raising *P* to a large number?

**Stationary Probabilities**
- A probability distribution $\pi$ is said to be *stationary* for a DTMC if:  
$\pi P = \pi$  
(Where $\pi$ is a row vector and P is a matrix)  
and  
$\sum_{i=0}^{M-1} \pi_i = 1$  
We can then rewrite the equations as:  
$\sum_{i=0}^{M-1} \pi_1 P_{ij} = \pi_j, j=0, ... , M-1$  
and  
$\sum_{i=0}^{M-1} \pi_i = 1$  
    - In the first set of equations, the LHS determines the probability of being in state *j* if the initial distibution is $\pi$. Hence the term *stationary*, if we start with this distribution, it never changes.
- Key Theorem  
    - Given a finite-state DTMC with *M* states, let  
    $\pi_j = \lim_{n \rightarrow \inf} P_{ij}^n \gt 0$  
    be the limiting probability of being in state j, and let $\pi = [\pi_0, \pi_1, ..., \pi_{M-1}]$, where $\sum_{i=0}^{M-1} \pi_i = 1$ be the limiting distribution. 
    - Assuming that the limiting distribution exists, then $\pi$ is also a stationary distribution and no other stationary distribution exists
    - Proof in lecture notes
- Example 1: A computer program's execution is modelled as a DTMC. The state is the resource being used at time *n*. Suppose that there are three resources: CPU (state 0), Disk A (state 1), and Disk B (state 2). The probability transition matrix is:  
$$P = \begin{bmatrix}
0.9 & 0.05 & 0.05 \\
0.2 & 0.8 & 0 \\
0.2 & 0 & 0.8 \\
\end{bmatrix}$$
    1. What is the probability that, given the program is initially using the CPU, it is using Disk A two time units after?  
    SOLN:  
    $X_n$ = state of system  
    $P(X_2 = 1 \| X_0 = 0) = P^2_{0,1}$
    $= 0.085$
    a
    2. What is the steady-state probability that Disk A is being used?  
    SOLN:  
    Need to solve $\pi P = \pi$  
    $[\pi_0 \pi_1 \pi_2] P = [\pi_0 \pi_1 \pi_2]$  
    The values of these vectors, given the columns of the matrix *P*, are:  
    $0.9 \pi_0 + 0.2 \pi_1 + 0.2 \pi_2 = \pi_0$  
    $0.05 \pi_0 + 0.8 \pi_1 = \pi_1$  
    $0.05 \pi_0 + 0.8 \pi_2 = \pi_2$  
    We need the $\pi$ values to be a probability distribution, therefore we need:  
    $\pi_0 + \pi_1 + \pi_2 = 1$  
    Solving these equations we get the steady state of Disk A as:  
    $\pi_1 = \frac{1}{6}$
- Example 2: Consider a multiprocessor system with two processors and two memory moduls (MMs). At each time point, requests for a MM are made in the following manner.
    1. If both processors are accessing different MMs, at the next time point each processor makes independent requests for the memory modules: with probability 0.4, a request is made ofr MM1, otherwise the request is made for MM2.
    2. If both processors are accessing the same MM, only one processor makes a new request at the next time step (the other maintains its request for the same MM). The request probabilities are the same as the first case.
    - Calculate the steady-state probability that the procesors are accessing different memory modules  
    SOLN:  
    State? Note the following observations:  
        1. Processors are identical in terms of access patterns (statistically)
        2. MMs are different in terms of access patterns
    - This suggests that the states of this problem are:  
    0: both processors accessing MM1  
    1: both processors accessing MM2  
    2: processors accessing different MMs  
    States could also be managed individually, but this works while being a smaller set of states. The probability matrix for this looks like:  
    $$ P = \begin{bmatrix}
    0.4 & 0 & 0.6\\
    0 & 0.6 & 0.4\\
    0.16 & 0.36 & 0.48\\
    \end{bmatrix} $$  
    NOTE: All rows should add up to 1, and the bottom row was made using (0.4)(0.4), (0.6)(0.6), and using the adding to 1 property  
    With the matrix and below equations,  
    $\pi P = \pi$  
    $\sum \pi_i = 1$  
    We can then deduce:  
    $\pi_2 = 0.4615$
- Expected time to reach a state
    - Consider an example with states (0, 1, 2, 3), and a transition matrix:  
    $$ P = \begin{bmatrix}
    0 & 0.4 & 0.6 & 0 \\
    0 & 0.4 & 0.6 & 0 \\
    0 & 0.9 & 0 & 0.1 \\
    0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
    \end{bmatrix}$$  
    - Define $T_{0,3}$ to be the number of steps to enter state 3 given that the system states in state 0  
    - We can write:  
    $E[T_{0,3}] = 1 + 0.4[T_{1, 3}] + 0.6E[T_{2,3}]$
        - The 1 is because a move is by default needed, and then 0.4 multiplied by the steps for going from 1 to 3, and 0.6 multiplied by the steps for going from 2 to 3, since those are the probabilities that we will go from state 0 to state 1 or 2 respectively
    - We can then get the additional equations  
    $E[T_{1,3}] = 1 + 0.4 E[T_{1, 3}] + 0.6 E[T_{2, 3}]$  
    $E[T_{2,3}] = 1 + 0.9 E[T_{1, 3}] + 0.1 E[T_{3, 3}]$  
    - Using $E[T_{3, 3}] = 0$, we now have three equations in three unknowns
    - Solving these gives us $E[T_{0, 3}] = 26.67$
