---
layout: post
title:  "4E03 - Lecture 16"
date:   2020-10-21 16:30:00 -0400
categories: 4E03
---

M/M/c/c Queue
===

M/M/c/c
- Loss system, no waiting. If a job arrives that finds all servers busy, it is lost. For $n \leq c$,  
$$\pi_n = (\Pi_{i=1}^n \frac{\lambda}{i\mu}) \pi_0$$  
$$= \frac{1}{n!}(\frac{\lambda}{\mu})^n \pi_0$$  
$$\pi_0 = \frac{1}{1 + \sum_{n=1}^c \frac{1}{n!} (\frac{\lambda}{\mu})^n}$$  
$$\pi_c = \frac{\frac{1}{c!}(\frac{\lambda}{\mu})^c}{1 + \sum_{n=1}^c \frac{1}{n!} (\frac{\lambda}{\mu})^n}$$

Client/Server Model
- Let the state be the number of jobs at the server
    - Could also be done with number of users thinking, but would get the same results
- Think time of clients is exponentially distributed with rate $\lambda$, and processing times are also exponentially distributed with rate $\mu$
- No need to keep track of individual jobs, so does not matter what scheduling policy at CPU is
- Going up from 0 to 1 job in the system is $M*\lambda$, where *M* is the number of clients  
Going up from 1 to 2 jobs in the system is $(M-1)\lambda$
- The rate of going up a state, with *M* as number of clients and *n* as number of jobs is then given as:  
$$X_n \Rightarrow X_{n+1} = (M - n)\lambda$$
- Going from 1 job to 0 is just the processing time $\mu$, uniform no matter how many jobs are in the system:  
$$X_n \Rightarrow X_{n-1} = \mu$$
- The equations for this model are given as follows:  
$$\pi_n = (\Pi_{i=1}^n \frac{\lambda(M-i + 1)}{\mu}) \pi_0$$  
$$\pi_n = ((\frac{\lambda}{\mu})^n \frac{M!}{(M-n)!})\pi_0$$  
$$\pi_0 = \frac{1}{\sum_{n=0}^M (\frac{\lambda}{\mu})^n \frac{M!}{(M-n)!}}$$

Ex1: Consider the client/server model, with $\mu = 1$ and $\lambda = 0.1$. The throughput of the server is bounded above by $\mu$. What value of *M* (number of users) leads to a throughput of 90% of this upper bound?
- SOLN:  
We need an expression for the throughput in terms of $(\lambda, \mu, \pi_n)$. We can get this with the expression:  
$$\mu(1-\pi_0)$$  
where $(1-\pi_0)$ is the probability the server is busy.  
To solve, Dr. Down plugged this into a program for different values of M, looking for values closest to when the following is true:  
$$(1-\pi_0) \geq 0.9$$  
$$\pi_0 \leq 0.1$$  
After some calculations, we can get the value:  
$$M=12 \rightarrow \pi_0 = 0.1187$$  
$$M=13 \rightarrow \pi_0 = 0.0843$$  
Therefore, the value of M leading to a throughput of 90% would be 13

Ex2: An existing system consists of a single server. Requests arrive according to a Poisson process with rate 3/hr. The processing times are exponentially distributed with mean 18 minutes. You are asked whether it would be beneficial to add a second (identical) processor. The two processors would share a common queue. The costs are as follows: Operating costs of \$25/hr per processor and cost of delay of \$5/hr per request
- SOLN:  
From the data given, we can tell that the base system is a M/M/1 queue. We would like to compute the cost of the current system.  
Each request waits:  
$$E[T] = \frac{1}{\mu-\lambda}$$  
$$= \frac{1}{60/18 - 3}$$  
$$= 3\text{hrs}$$  
We can now calculate the waiting cost (note, lambda added in for requests per hour):  
$$\text{Waiting Cost} = \lambda(3\text{hr/req})(\$5\text{/hour})$$  
$$=\$45\text{/hr}$$  
Adding on the operating cost, we get the total cost to be:  
$$\$45 + \$25 = \$70 \text{/hr}$$  
The new system would be a M/M/2 system, and the average wait time would be (complicated equation in slides, answer given here):  
$$E[T] = 0.3762\text{hrs}$$  
From this, our total cost would be:  
$$\lambda * E[T] * 5 = \$5.64\text{/hr}$$  
$$\$5.64 + 2(\$25) = \$55.64$$  
Therefore, it is worthwhile to get the new server for the system.